---
layout: page
subheadline: Development
title:  "CLI Data Gem"
teaser: "My first Ruby gem utilizes the GitHub API"
breadcrumb: true
tags:
    - ruby
categories:
    - blog
header: no
image:
    title: header-ruby.png
    thumb: header-ruby-thumb.png
comments: true
---
My latest lab project on learn.co required writing a command-line Ruby gem that either uses an API or scrapes HTML to retrieve data and display it to the user. I thought it would be fun to use the [GitHub API][1] to retrieve a list of a GitHub user's pull requests since this would fulfill the requirements of the project. The previous data labs I had completed used Nokogiri to scrape HTML files so this would give me a good opportunity to learn how to use Ruby to interpret the JSON output of API requests.

After several days of research and coding the [initial version of my project][2] is finally complete! There were moments of confusion and frustration but it was satisfying to figure out solutions and create a working product. I even [published my project on rubygems][3] to make it easy for anyone to install and run my application!

After going through the whole process I am amazed to see how easy it is to publish and share working code with Ruby.

## Starting the Gem

After watching Avi's video tutorial and some experimenting I started my project by using [bundler to create a rubygem skeleton][4]:

~~~
bundle gem list_pull_requests
~~~

Then I had to decide on how I wanted to structure my application. I wanted my command-line code to mimic Avi's daily_deal code so I needed to create a <mark>ListPullRequests::CLI</mark> class and require it in <mark>list_pull_requests.rb</mark>.

It occurred to me that instead of listing a user's pull requests my application could also list a repository's pull requests. In order to make that functionality easier to add later down the road I wrote most of my API request parsing code in the <mark>ListPullRequests::User</mark> class. This way I could name the code for repository pull requests <mark>ListPullRequests::Repo</mark>.

I also needed a way to store information about each individual pull request. Since there were several different attributes I wanted my application to display I decided to create the <mark>ListPullRequests::Pr</mark> class that would store each pull request as an instance of the object and the attributes of the pull request as respective instance variables.

Next I needed my application to actually output instructions to the command-line and retrieve user input. Following Avi's [daily_deal][5] structure made this pretty quick and easy. My program still didn't do anything because I needed to convert the user input into an API request and parse the data. After playing around in *irb* I knew the commands I needed to get the details and I added code to list the data. The output was hard to read because the elements weren't distinct so I added the *colorize* dependency and colored my output. I proceeded to write code to retrieve and list details for a pull request and add more functionality, making git commits along the way.

I ran into a good bit of trouble after trying to install my gem on my system. At first I thought it was because I was somehow not installing my gem correctly but after installing the [daily_deal][5] gem on my system I realized it was because I needed to fill out my gemspec file. I encountered my next problem when I tried to publish my gem to rubygems. I still had code in the gemspec for a push host whitelist and after removing it my code was successfully published!

I promptly uninstalled the locally installed gem of my application and tried grabbing the gem via `gem install list-pull-requests`. My gem was downloaded and installed from rubygems and I could run it from any directory in my command line! I was suddenly amazed that everything had worked and my application was available for anyone to quickly try and improve upon.

All I had left to do to finish my project was write this blog post and make a <a href="#" data-reveal-id="videoModal">video walkthrough</a> of how a user would interact with my application.

I'm excited to learn whatever's next, particularly how to turn our ruby command line applications into working interactive web sites!

## Other Posts About Ruby
{: .t60 }
{% include list-posts tag='ruby' %}

<div id="videoModal" class="reveal-modal large" data-reveal="">
  <div class="flex-video widescreen vimeo" style="display: block;">
    <iframe width="1280" height="720" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eUZ8QscUrCs" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
  <a class="close-reveal-modal">&#215;</a>
</div>

 [1]: https://developer.github.com/v3/
 [2]: https://github.com/thegands/list_pull_requests
 [3]: https://rubygems.org/gems/list-pull-requests
 [4]: http://bundler.io/v1.11/bundle_gem.html
 [5]: https://github.com/learn-co-curriculum/daily_deal
